# mingyur-dont-clear-your-mind-guided — YouTube UVwff2w59Y4 — captions: auto — 1848 words — 17 min

[00:00] Meditation is not um so many people think medit meditation means think of nothing you know empty mind empty brain and um no thought no emotion that's impossible we cannot do that if you try to do that what what would happen you will think more for example you can Try you can say don't 
[00:32] think about pizza what will happen you will think about pizza more so normally I I I teach this a lot so when you say don't think about pizza don't think about pizza then so many pizza will come and and some another misunderstand is some people think meditation meaning out peace [Music] Peace, calm, 1, 2, 3. 
[01:06] Relax. The more you relax, you get more tense. So look for peace, calm, joy also doesn't work because for example when you go to sleep in the night when you go go to sleep you know if you think I need sleep I need to sleep now I need sleep now what will 
[01:39] happen sleep run way you will become more alert. So that is the our normal habit of our mind. Sometime what I call crazy monkey mind. So it's always jumping and it does the opposite. So when we say no pizza, more pizza will come. When we need sleep, sleep run 
[02:10] away. So, so this misunderstand about meditation though the the calm, peace, joy, clarity are the byproduct of meditation not the essence of meditation. So the real essence of meditation is we don't need to do anything. We don't need to look for anything. We 
[02:40] don't need to create anything new. We don't need to get rid of anything. It's just there with all of us. So this is the our sometime what we call basic innate goodness. What I call innate well-being. So we all have that. So there are so many different uh in the tradition there are so many different talks, teachings about that. So that means we all have this 
[03:11] wonderful nature. So fundamentally all of you are by nature wonderful. So when I was young I am having panic attacks and I learned first time these teachings from my father and my father said don't try to fight with the panic. So what I did is I always fighting with my panic attacks. Sometime I run run away from my 
[03:41] panic attacks. Sometime I surrender to panic. I fight with the panic. Panic become worse actually. So for me panic of panic is the most pro problematic. The panic of panic is stronger than panic itself. So my father said don't fight with the panic because you don't need why the our fundamental quality the innate well-being is like 
[04:15] sky in the mountain. I was born in the Himalayan mountain. So we have very wonderful sky. But Himalayan mountain are not always beautiful and nice. You know sometime we have storms, winter snowstorms, summer thunderstorms. So they are very scary. So I develop panic attacks 
[04:45] mostly these weathers. And I have a problem with strangers also. So my panic said these my my father said this experience those feeling are just like storm in the Himalayan mountain. My panic attacks is like storm in the Himalayan mountain. My inner well-being is like sky in the Himalayan mountain. So no matter how much storm 
[05:17] comes in the sky that sky cannot be changed the nature of sky cannot be changed by storm isn't it? Yes or no how many of you believe that? I think you all you all have sky there right? Sometime there's a snow comes, sometime heavy rain comes, some sometime thunder comes. 
[05:48] But these I cannot change the nature of sky. So what is this innate well-being? What is this inner sky? So what we call awareness, love and compassion and wisdom. So these are the very ancient kind of the tradition that to recognize this inner well-being and be with that. So now you don't need to stop thought you don't need to look for peace come joy because your true nature is 
[06:20] perfect from beginning. Your inner well-being is wonderful. It's complete. It's not incomplete. It's complete. So we need to know how to recognize that first we have to recognize and second we need to maintain that. So that is with you already you just maintain thought is okay if you maintain 
[06:52] your awareness if the pizza comes let pizza come let pizza go let sleep come let sleep go. So if you not look for sleep actually you you get sleep better when you in the night you just relax when you relax then sleep will come more easy I need to sleep I need to sleep sleep go away so then what happen eventually not not just awareness there 
[07:24] there's a love and compassion innate love and compassion with us 24 powers and not only that we all have wisdom this innate wisdom. So these three things I discuss with the anyway anytime meditation so what we call a a so this I create new program that everybody can benefit and this is kind of like essence of this 
[07:54] ancient practice. So to to recognize our innate qualities. So how many of you believe now you have awareness all the time. So when I was young my father told me about these things. At the beginning I don't believe that. So of course at the beginning it's very difficult to believe but now I I believe because we have this technique to how to recognize that. So these techniques are called the 
[08:28] meditation. So maybe I will teach you one simple meditation technique. Now um so awareness so I will maybe I will talk a little bit about awareness. Awareness meaning our fundamental quality of the mind. Sometime what we call clarity, awareness, luminous mind and the cognitive mind all as meaning that you all 
[09:00] have this sense of [Music] um knowing right? Can you see my hand? Can you see this screen? Yes, that is awareness. Can you hear my voice? Yeah, of course. Right. Through awareness manifest through eyes can see, through ear can hear, through nose can smell, can taste, can feel, sensation. 
[09:32] Through the body, cold, warm, pleasant, unpleasant sensations. And through mind you can think thoughts, emotions and habitual tendency all are the manifestation of awareness. So now the practice how to connect with awareness maintain that we have to choose one object. So maybe we will practice breathing meditation the first. So breathing meditation is 
[10:05] uh okay. So we will practice breathing meditation. Okay. So I will ask you a question. How many of you are breathing right now? Raise your hand. Please raise your hand in front of video. I hope you're raising hand. I only see screen. Okay. So how many of 
[10:35] you not breathing right now? Raise your hand. The same question, right? So that means meditation that's the awareness. So when I ask you are you breathing now in that moment your mind is with your breath mind and breath together when the breathing in you know you're breathing in when the breathing 
[11:07] out you know you're breathing out breathing in breathing out you just know you just feel also okay you know also okay you articulate about your breath Breath also. Okay. So normally there are three different personalities. Some they observe image comes with the breath. Some you need to feel sensation through the nostril. The feeling of breath warm cold or touching sensation. Some you 
[11:39] have to articulate. You have to talk about I'm breathing in no breathing out. Okay. Okay. So you have to describe any style is okay as long as if your mind breath together that's fine. So that is the breathing meditation easy right and some of you might say I'm not breathing now that means your mind also with the breathing so actually meditation is very easy 
[12:11] just you know the breath is coming in and breath is going out but of course our mind cannot be with the breath too few seconds totally okay. Um maybe breathing in, breathing out, we forget the breath and we are in the restaurant having food or thinking about to-do list for tomorrow or totally lost something even something happened 
[12:41] yesterday. No problem. Remember again, oh breath again. I'm breathing the breath. Breath is coming in. Breath is going out. And while you're watching the breath, if the pizza comes, no problem. Let pizza come, let pizza go. It's like this. Breathing in. Then in the background, maybe pizza comes. Breathing in and breathing out. And another pizza comes. Breathing in again. Then pizza go 
[13:12] here. Breathing out and the pizza go another pizza comes. No problem. As long as if you remember your breath, two pizza, three pizza, 10 pizza comes, no problem. So not only pizza, to-do list, restaurant, relationship, your work, your life, past history, future plan, anything can come as long as if 
[13:44] you still remember your breathing. So what we call okay with not okay, blah blah blah. Okay, yada yada. Okay, anything's okay. But you are not totally lost. You're still remembering glimpse of the breath. Okay. So we will do this practice together for a few one one minute. So please everybody keep your spine loosely straight and first feel your 
[14:15] body and special the gravity in your body and relax muscles in your body. And now please to be aware of your breath. You can close your eyes or open eyes up to you. Just feel or 
[14:46] [Music] observe or talk about that you are breathing in and breathing out. So meanwhile, as I mentioned before, all the to-do list, tomorrow plan, past history, they all can 
[15:18] come. Don't try to stop them. And as long as if you still remember your breathing, your mind and the breath together, you're okay. You're in meditation. 
[15:51] You are with awareness. Okay. How was it? So actually you can apply This is a formal meditation. Now we let 
[16:21] go of everything and we practice meditation together. But informal meditation you can meditate everywhere anytime. So this this why this new program what we call anywhere anytime meditation while you're walking while you're having coffee you have breath with you all the time right 24 hours. So you can you can watch half breath, quarter breath or one full 
[16:54] breath doesn't matter just glimpse glimpse here and there anytime anywhere in your life especially when when I was young when I feel panic attacks I watch my breath panic comes watch breath worry comes watch prayer um anger comes watch breath. So this is the first step normally. So then normally what we call we have to do 
[17:25] if if you're new to meditation we have to do this kind of meditation let's say the breathing meditation for one month at least one month then eventually you can use the anger or panic or any other thing as support for your meditation later you can do that. Yes.